document GROUP BY (#1607)
neo4j/docs-cypher: modules/ROOT/pages/deprecations-additions-removals-compatibility.adoc

[[cypher-deprecations-additions-removals-2026.07]]
== Neo4j 2026.07

=== Deprecation
[cols="2", options="header"]
|===
| Feature
| Details

a|
label:deprecated[]
[source, cypher, role="noheader"]
----
RETURN a.p + 0 AS b, COUNT(*) AS c 
ORDER BY a.p + 0 + 1
----
a| Deprecated the following:

- subclause expressions which reference projection item expressions which are more complex than a variable or a property access on a variable.

> - cases with an ambiguity between an incoming variable and a newly declared variable in the subclause expression.

Reviewer: cf. comment about the term "alias". "newly declared variable" is not incorrect here, but I would find it more fitting to say "new alias" or just "alias".

```suggestion
- cases with an ambiguity between an incoming variable and a alias in the subclause expression.
```

Worth pointing out that the example only illustrates the first item ("subclause expressions which reference projection item expressions which are more complex than a variable or a property access on a variable.").

An example for the second item would be

```
MATCH (a)-->(b)
RETURN a.p AS a, COUNT(*) AS c 
ORDER BY a.p
```

or

```
MATCH (a)-->(b)
RETURN a.p AS x, b AS a, COUNT(*) AS c 
ORDER BY a.p
```

In both cases, it is unclear if the `a` in ORDER BY refers to the alias `a` in return item `b AS a` or the variable `a` from `MATCH (a)-->(b)`.

GQL gives this clear semantics (the alias wins). Our existing implementation (without `GROUP BY`) has inconsistent handling of this. To make it consistent with GQL we have break queries. This deprecation is meant to remove these cases from the user base over time, so that in some glorious future we can given it the GQL semantics.

Author: added the example and accepted the suggestion

[[cypher-deprecations-additions-removals-2026.07]]
== Neo4j 2026.07

> === Deprecation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Deprecations
```

[cols="2", options="header"]
|===
| Feature
| Details

a|
label:deprecated[]
[source, cypher, role="noheader"]
----
RETURN a.p + 0 AS b, COUNT(*) AS c 
ORDER BY a.p + 0 + 1
----

[source, cypher, role="noheader"]
----
MATCH (a)-->(b)
RETURN a.p AS a, COUNT(*) AS c 
ORDER BY a.p
----
a| Deprecated the following:

> * Subclause expressions which reference projection item expressions which are more complex than a variable or a property access on a variable.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Subclause expressions which reference projection item expressions more complex than a variable or a property access on a variable.
```

> - cases with an ambiguity between an incoming variable and an alias in the subclause expression.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Subclause expressions which reference projection item expressions which are more complex than a variable or a property access on a variable.
* Cases with an ambiguity between an incoming variable and an alias in the subclause expression.
```

Elsewhere you capitalised bulletpoints, but did not punctuate. (I think capitalisation + full-stops in bullet points are preferred?)

> * Cases with an ambiguity between an incoming variable and an alias in the subclause expression.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Cases where the subclause expression is ambiguous between an incoming variable and an alias.
```

For more details, see xref:indexes/semantic-indexes/vector-indexes.adoc#config-vector.default_search_expansion_factor[Vector index configuration settings -> `config-vector.default_search_expansion_factor`] and xref:indexes/semantic-indexes/vector-indexes.adoc#config-vector.quantization.type[`config-vector.quantization.type`].
|===

=== New

[cols="2", options="header"]
|===
| Feature
| Details

a|

> label:functionality[]

Author: ```suggestion
```

For more details, see xref:indexes/semantic-indexes/vector-indexes.adoc#config-vector.default_search_expansion_factor[Vector index configuration settings -> `config-vector.default_search_expansion_factor`] and xref:indexes/semantic-indexes/vector-indexes.adoc#config-vector.quantization.type[`config-vector.quantization.type`].
|===

=== New

[cols="2", options="header"]
|===
| Feature
| Details

a|
label:new[]
[source, cypher, role="noheader"]
----
MATCH (p:Person)-[:ACTED_IN]->(m:Movie)
RETURN p.name AS actor_name, m.genre AS genre, avg(m.rating) AS averageRating
GROUP BY actor_name, genre
----

> | A new xref:clauses/group-by.adoc[GROUP BY] subclause for `WITH` and `RETURN` has been added which lets user explicitly state the grouping keys for the query.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| A new xref:clauses/group-by.adoc[GROUP BY] subclause used in conjunction with `WITH` and `RETURN` clauses has been added. It allows a user to explicitly state the grouping keys for the query.
```

> This is an alternative to the implicit grouping available in Cypher.

Reviewer: Any point in mentioning here that GROUP BY is GQL conformant? Have we done this for similar case (e.g. LET, NEXT, FINISH)?

Author: afaik, we do not point out GQL conformance in the additions, ... page
it's in the GROUP BY page, and the GQL conformance page also lists it ofc

|===

=== New

[cols="2", options="header"]
|===
| Feature
| Details

a|
label:new[]
[source, cypher, role="noheader"]
----
MATCH (p:Person)-[:ACTED_IN]->(m:Movie)
RETURN p.name AS actor_name, m.genre AS genre, avg(m.rating) AS averageRating
GROUP BY actor_name, genre
----

> | A new xref:clauses/group-by.adoc[GROUP BY] subclause used in conjunction with `WITH` and `RETURN` clauses has been added. It allows a user to explicitly state the grouping keys for the query.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| A new xref:clauses/group-by.adoc[`GROUP BY`] subclause used in conjunction with the `WITH` or `RETURN` clauses has been added. It allows a user to explicitly state the grouping keys for the query.
```
